uh hey everybody welcome welcome back to another love another lovely episode of python bites
let's kick it off hello and welcome yeah sorry brian it's all right hello and welcome to python
bites where we deliver python news and headlines directly to your earbuds this is episode 441
recorded July 21st, 2025.
And I am Brian Okken.
Who am I?
I am Michael Kennedy.
Hello, everyone.
This episode is sponsored by DigitalOcean.
Thank you, DigitalOcean.
Hear about them later in the show.
If you'd like to give us some topics for the show
or just ask us questions or connect,
the links to Mastodon and Blue Sky are in the show notes
and on our webpage, pythonbytes.fm.
While you're there, you may as well go ahead and sign up for our newsletter,
or we'll send you links for the show afterwards.
And I apologize, because last week it was a little late,
because I've been sick, but I'm better now.
And if you'd like to join the show,
we do post it live, usually Tuesday mornings.
Monday, no, Monday mornings.
Sorry, Monday mornings at 10.
It used to be Tuesday.
but just go ahead and go over to pythonbytes.fm
slash live and it'll tell you when the next one is
and then even if we change it you can see there
yeah so let's kick it off what do you got for us
Michael? Let's do some follow up for our first item here
so remember last week
I talked about RQ Lite the lightweight user friendly
distributed relational database built on SQLite.
And that was pretty cool.
You could build fault-tolerant relational databases
in clusters, even potentially geo-distributed
using SQLite.
Well, as always, our wonderful listeners are like,
that's cool.
Did you know about?
Right?
Yeah.
I love that, though.
I do, too.
Yeah, thank you.
So two people wrote in and said, did you know about?
And one was Michael Booth.
And Michael Booth said, you should check out Terso,
the next evolution of SQLite.
So Terso is interesting in that it is kind of like SQLite,
but rewritten in Rust with the idea
that it can be a distributed database type of thing.
also adding some of these AI features, as in vector search
and other things that you need to be
able to support working with AI.
So pretty cool.
If you look through the website, it's
like their proper tertio.tech, which it's cool,
but it kind of leaves it a little bit unsure what exactly it is.
But what is its relation to SQLite?
So it's-- go over to the GitHub.
It's a little bit clearer.
So it has SQLite compatibility.
It is not based on SQLite like RQ Lite is.
But it has language biotines for Python and other--
maybe some of these other languages people have heard of,
like Java and JavaScript and so on.
But it has async I/O support, which is really cool.
And you might say, well, it's SQLite.
Can it really have async I/O support?
Yes.
At least on Linux.
It uses I/O U-ring to make that happen.
But it runs on all the platforms.
So you can develop on macOS, but then you
get better perf on Linux, for example.
Also, they're working on adding a begin concurrent operation,
like a SQL statement, a query statement.
in indexing for vector search like it's probably pretty much required and better alter support
right so basically think of it as a a more modern take not just because it's rewritten in rust which
seems to be like the thing you do but as part of that taking on a lot of ideas like concurrency
others. Okay. So big question, is it ready for production use? No. No. But these folks also
worked on this thing called lib SQL. So it says that the tarot database is the next evolution of
SQLite in Rust. They had previously worked on something called lib SQL, which is an attempt to
evolve SQLite in a similar direction, but through a fork rather than a rewrite. And they're like,
we think this new database thing is a better way to go.
So if what I talked about with RQ Lite inspires you,
this also might.
They also have some kind of what you might expect
as open core,
but we'll do the infrastructure side of things for you.
So they've got this thing called Terso Cloud,
which is a production or a paid sort of thing, right?
so serverless access or sync or whatever you want right replication sync vector search all that kind
of stuff basically managed there's all right so that's thing one the other one comes to this is
like all it's all Michael Michael's all the way down so we had Michael Booth recommend that one
got me Michael presenting it we got Mike Fiedler talking about the next one here and Mike Fiedler
says, have you heard, well, listen to the most recent Python
bytes and RQ Lite.
It's cool.
Hadn't heard of that.
Something related that might be interesting is Lightstream.io.
Now, Lightstream.io is more SQLite than before.
You just keep using SQLite, like the one built into Python,
but you launch a little daemon that watches it
and constantly syncs it with S3 or Azure Blob Storage
or something like that.
Okay.
So when you do that, what do you get?
You get something pretty cool.
It just constantly streams changes to AWS S3,
Azure Blob Storage, Google Cloud Storage, et cetera.
And that means you basically get failover.
So imagine you're like,
I would love to just have a SQLite database
that I can run on a simple little app.
But what if that server goes down?
What if that server fails?
Then all my data is lost from the last time I backed it up
because my alternative was to run some kind of cluster of Postgres or Mongo or whatever.
But then you're into lots of DevOps and managing those things
or you're paying for managed databases,
which can be relatively expensive to small servers like DigitalOcean has.
So what you can do is you can just keep on using regular SQLite
but then use this Lightstream, which has no real performance differences in terms.
These other two things are trying to change how SQLite works or re-implement a compatible API.
This one just says, we promise to hook into...
I put a link in the show notes.
There's a nice write-up about this that they did.
It's sort of like, why is this?
And it's called Lightstream Revamped.
And it also just talks about, like, why did they build this?
How does it work?
So it says it takes over the wall checkpointing process
to continuously stream updates to the database.
So basically, as commits are committed to the SQLite file,
it just keeps pushing that to blob storage.
Cool, right?
Yeah.
So if that RQ Lite thing was interesting but not quite what you're looking for,
maybe one of these two things is.
Yeah.
Interesting.
Pennies a day, I like that.
Dirt cheap.
Yeah, dirt cheap.
Only costs pennies a day
because it's just blob storage, right?
So however you do that.
And the Lightstream,
I don't know that they,
I don't see pricing.
How about that?
So this is just pure open source,
whereas the...
This is pretty cool.
Terso was like, you can do the open source thing yourself,
or we can do our cloud thing, right?
I don't know which of those makes you happier,
but they're not the same in that regard.
Or they are the same with a wrapper, pay wrapper.
Anyway.
Yeah.
Okay, cool.
Awesome.
Over to you.
I want to talk about project status a little bit.
So I do want to talk about this new PEP.
So PEP 792, project status markers in the simple index.
I should have muted for that.
Sorry.
So project status, what is this about?
So this is a new PEP that was, well, it's not really that.
It is pretty new.
So it actually updates in February of this year, and it's now accepted.
so i'm going to talk about this a little bit but i want to talk about project status and what this
means so if i take a look at a couple of my silly projects i've got py test check which is a project
i maintain and i actually intend people to be able to use it so it's maintained and so i have added
a trove classifier to say the status of the project is production stable i think you can use it in
production but it's you know yeah and but this is optional you don't maintainers don't have to put
this in for instance i also have a another one called py test crayons that i just did for a uh
a talk that i gave and um i didn't put the um the status in there so that's an it's an optional
thing so what we have we have in the current situation there is the trove classifiers that you
can optionally add to um uh to to your project and you if you like for instance start taking it down
you can say that it's inactive it's not but i don't think very many people do that often inactive
just means somebody left but it's still they haven't updated a new one that's like please
close the door on your way out usually they just walk out the door so and then there's also there's
actually three kinds of status so there's that the trove classifiers but then there's also
uh indices uh can mark uh a district can mark distributions and releases as yanked so you can
um like a version you can yank um so it's not there anymore so then the it's still it's still
like got an entry there but it's been a yanked uh whether it's true or false so and then you know
I've started seeing that a lot lately, actually.
Have you?
At least UVPIP warnings.
So I'll say, update the dependencies of this project,
basically UVPIP compile, and then I'll install the requirements.
And it'll say, this thing has been yanked because of,
and it'll have some reason, like broken metadata or whatever.
I'm like, well, I don't know what I'm supposed to do about this
because something needed it.
Yeah.
OK.
I've not seen anything fail.
I haven't seen the apps no longer run because something got that status,
but I've seen warnings about this now.
And then there's another type of status that's PyPI itself can have a status
for an entire project.
And the entire project can be quarantined if the administrators of PyPI
think that the project has been like it's got like malware in it or something.
So they can quarantine it.
and also a project owner can archive a project and say basically i'm i'm i'm you can disable new
releases um and it's still around but it's the nobody can update to it and it's just archived
it's there for historical purposes i guess anyway so there's three statuses and it's a little
confusing on how to use those um as a as a if you had an alternative in text if you were trying to
like do dependency resolution or other things. So trying to clean that up a bit. So there's really
this proposal is to have one project that always has exactly one status. And the status will be,
it'll be active. And then there's some semantics around that. Active or archived or quarantined
and deprecated and this makes sense so it's either either it's it's in use it's active or
it's not um but it's also what does it not mean it's either you know these various levels of why
you can't you shouldn't use it um and i think this is um this is a way for good way forward
to have like to kind of consolidate these now this is this has been accepted this uh this active
archived quarantined deprecated status and it can only be one of those but this has been accepted
however it's not implemented yet so don't go out and look in PyPI to try to find this yet so this
is this just was accepted July 8th resolution so you know we will update you further as we hear
from people in the Python community
that this is all implemented.
Yeah, excellent.
I think I'm behind it.
The quarantine one is good.
I'm very glad I've never seen that warning.
And the archive one feels to me
like a little bit of a supply chain safety type thing.
Like, I'm not going to mess with this.
I will never update this.
But let's not allow something to happen
where someone else could either.
Well, and I'm not sure.
So I was trying to read this.
I was trying to understand kind of how it's going to be set.
So it's probably not going to be something just in the Trove classifier.
So it probably is going to be something outside of the data itself.
So because there's times where it's clear there's nobody updating it anymore,
and you can't get a hold of the maintainer,
you need to be able to say, this one's dead.
I think it's too bad that we don't have a better way to say,
but after the fact, if somebody just stops maintaining something,
hey, does anybody else want to start maintaining this?
I know there's security problems around that,
but it might be good to be able to have some things live on.
Yeah, and just archiving old stuff.
It's not good.
Was it GitHub, I think, that got into a big uproar
they decided that they're going to
archive a bunch of
stuff if it hadn't been updated
in years, or was it
NPM? I don't know, one of these types of
places. If stuff
doesn't get touched, people are like, hey, it's not
unmaintained, it's just done.
There's nothing to add, it's perfect.
It works.
Exactly.
Cool. All right, well, before we
move on, let's talk
about our sponsor, huh?
Yeah.
So super excited to have DigitalOcean back to support the show.
As always, this episode is brought to you by DigitalOcean.
And DigitalOcean is a comprehensive cloud infrastructure
that's simple to spin up even for the most complex workloads,
and it's way better value than most cloud providers.
I've looked at the big three,
and they're not even close in how much value you get per dollar
and how much easier it is to use.
So at DigitalOcean, companies can save up to 30% off their cloud bill.
They boast a 99.99% uptime SLA.
That means they promise to support that level of uptime.
Our experience, Brian, running Python Bytes and other things on DigitalOcean
for many years was way higher than four nines.
Really, really reliable.
Well, love them.
They also have industry-leading pricing on bandwidth.
Also true, like 10 times, 8 times cheaper than AWS and Azure.
Really good.
So it's built to be the cloud backbone of businesses, small and large,
and now they have GPU-powered virtual machines,
plus storage, database, networking capabilities all-in-one platform
so AI developers can confidently create apps that their users will love.
Devs have access to a complete set of infrastructure tools they need,
both training and inference, so they can build anything they dream up.
DigitalOcean provides full-service cloud infrastructure that's simple to use,
reliable no matter the use case, and scalable for any business.
So did I say good value?
$4 a month for a server.
That's yours.
Your Linux server you SSH into.
Amazing.
And GPUs, servers for under $1 per hour.
So easy to spin up infrastructure.
to simplify even the most intense business demands.
That's DigitalOcean.
If you use the DO4bytes code,
then you can get up to $200 in free credit
to get started, DO4bytes.
Just click the link in your podcast player show notes.
DigitalOcean is the cloud that's got you covered.
So like I said, please use our link.
You'll find the podcast player show notes,
a clickable chapter URL while I'm speaking right now,
And at the top of the page at pythonbytes.fm for the episode,
thank you to DigitalOcean for supporting Python Bytes.
Indeed, indeed.
Now, over to you.
Well, so I want to talk about testing a little bit.
So Hugo van Kemenad,
uh love you Hugo sorry uh wrote a post called coverage run coverage on tests and this is
something that I've taught everybody to do and or taught everybody I can can get my get their
hold of their ears to do this because it's important but I'm glad that Hugo wrote a post
about it and this was just going to be an extra however um I was blown away by a few things here
and I'm like oh we got to make this highlight it a little bit more so that the classic reason why
you should run coverage on your test is because of the copy paste modify problem with pytest
because pytest really kind of it the name of the test is just sort of shows up in the reporting
so it's very easy to um to copy my you take an old test and since you're not calling the test
function yourself. It's easy to copy, paste, modify, and forget to change the name. And if
you do that, the second test just hides the name, hides the first one. And that is the classic
reason why I tell people to run coverage so that you don't do this. And it's hard to figure out
otherwise. But a couple of cool things that I learned from this post is that Ruff's rule F811
f811 catches that apparently so there is if you run rough on your test code also
with at least f811 turned on you'll it it checks for variables which the function name is officially
a variable that are defined and and redefined or otherwise shadowed and unused so if you used a
a variable, didn't use it, and redefined it. That's similar to defining a test twice. So I
didn't know that. So I will make sure that I've got rough running on my test code also. So that's
cool. Also a tip to say, hey, if you're really just copy-paste modifying a test, maybe think
about pytest parameterization, which I agree. You might want to just parameterize the test. But this
is also pretty common it's so common to copy paste modify the second example is what the one that i
really was like oh my gosh we have to cover this because i would have never i wouldn't have caught
this so his second example is this weird okay so it's like a he's got an image some image stuff
that he's testing and it's like i don't know it's i guess i'm just it's a little bit of a complicated
thing you've got some colors and images and you're trying to test in the in the end you're asserting
whether or not images are similar of a reloaded image versus an expected image and i don't really
understand what's going on here but um it doesn't look terrible but one of the things in here is
that um when he ran coverage it said that uh these two lines at the bottom are not being run at all
and he's got a a some images a set of images that he's iterating over and apparently there's nothing
in them so what's going on um and the thing that's going on apparently is uh this his his images are a
generator is what's going on so he's got some images that are being uh set up as a generator
so like a uh you know for i a generator comprehension yeah generator comprehension
and then he passes that to a function that consumes the generator um and then uh and then
when he tries to use it as the as in the assert section there's nothing there anymore and i would
have never like obviously this is this is highlighted because i use generated way more than in generator
comprehensions more than I used to because they're cool and they're efficient. And if you've got huge
things, they use up less memory. So I'm using them more and more. And I probably am using in my test
and I better make sure that I'm not like mucking up with things like this. So a pretty cool reason
to use coverage on your test code to make sure that you don't do this. Oh yeah, the fix, by the
way of doing this is just
instead of using a
generator comprehension, just use a list
and pass it. Square brackets,
not parentheses.
It's subtle, though. I agree. Very subtle.
Oh, yeah. That's the difference, really.
Yeah. Parentheses versus brackets.
And then it works.
Yeah.
Okay.
Anyway.
Thanks, Hugo.
Yeah. Thanks, Hugo.
All right.
But let's talk about something simpler than all that SQLite distributed async business.
Here's a problem, Brian.
You have a program, probably in our case, often a Python program, and you want to give it to somebody and let them run it.
How do you do that?
Still, to this day, there's no amazing options to do that.
I know we have Pi 2.exe and Pi 2.app, but those things are, while awesome,
they're not consistently reliable and all sorts of things.
So this is a little bit more dev-focused than that,
but if you have Docker installed on the machine, right?
So if Docker is like Docker Desktop or OrbStack or whatever,
and I guess even in the upcoming macOS,
we're supposed to have a built-in Docker equivalent
built straight into macOS, which should be interesting.
Anyway, if you have any of those,
there's this project called Docker2.exe.
Huh.
To execute.
Well, I believe it works on all the platforms.
I don't think it's just Windows.exe,
even though, you know, yeah, it absolutely works on Windows,
Linux, and Darwin, a.k.a. macOS.
So just to executable, right?
And the idea is that if you have a Docker image with an entry point or
something like that that will start an app running,
you can simply build that as a executable,
either a.exe on Windows, a.app, you have to rename it I think more or less.
They're just executable binaries, right?
So you can take that Docker image and build it into an executable, which is pretty awesome.
So you could, you know, the example they give is kind of, it's a bad, I'm going to call it as a full-on bad example,
because it says, here is a bare Linux image.
You can distribute that as a binary.
It's like, okay, great.
That's not exactly the use case.
You know, the use case is I have something I want to give to someone and run it.
Right. So as a Docker thing, so maybe a better example would be like, here's copying over my source code, building a Docker image, and then turning that base Docker image into an executable that I can distribute. Right. But this thing would do that. It's just the example doesn't show that. So I think that is pretty neat. And if you want yet another way to distribute a more durable tool to somebody, if they have Docker, then you're good to go.
right it's pretty cool well did they do they have to have a docker yes okay
because basically somehow this thing just it bundles up the docker image and
then just executes it using docker in the same way that you would just say
docker run etc the other thing that's not clear to me is if there's a way to
pass through mappings for example map port 8000 to 2722 whatever you know what
I mean or map this volume to this folder probably you can in the exit like when
you run the executable can you pass that kind of stuff to it also again the
reason I don't like this example here boy they just like bundle up Linux in the
Docker file itself, you can say expose this port and do other type of things like that
in the Docker file.
So you can bake in, like if you're saying, my thing is a little Flask app that runs using
maybe SQLite for the database, it exposes this port so that you can then, you know,
it could print out a thing like click here to like talk to the server and launches a
URL, the web browser to like a local URL.
So you can do that with, I'm pretty sure with expose and other stuff in the Docker file.
But yeah, anyway, you want to ship a Docker image as just an executable binary?
Check this thing out.
Cool.
Very neat.
All right.
I know that you have extras, and I don't.
Okay.
I've got some testing code news.
So testing code has sort of been on pause.
When was the last time?
May 7th.
And what?
It's July now.
It's been on pause for a while because of life.
But life has got a little bit of room in it now.
So I'm going to do a little bit of testing code.
So there's three episodes in the queue and hopefully more to come.
So at least, and so this week there will be an episode.
And I'm pretty excited because this week's episode is covering pytest Django with Adam Johnson.
And a lot of people have asked me about pytest Django.
And since I am not a Django-esque expert, and Adam is, Adam was willing to talk with me about it.
And it's a really great discussion.
So I'll be excited to get that out.
I'll be excited to get that out this week.
And then also, I went ahead.
So I'm using a hosting provider I'm using for this is Transistor FM.
And Transistor has the ability to push things to YouTube, but it's a little bit wacky.
So I went ahead and turned that on.
And so everything now is for testing code.
Well, not everything yet.
207 episodes are now up on youtube um the uh the catch is they sort of show up in random order
uh they they they push um i think 80 episodes a day or something like that um they they do a lot
so by by like time we i don't know by the time you probably hear this if you if you don't hear
it on the first day um they'll probably be all up but anyway um they're there but they're just in
weird order that's a lot of content to be pushing up there i suspect though after it sort of bulk
uploads once it does as you start launching it'll it'll go in the right order yeah well it's it's
because youtube orders i'm pretty sure youtube orders in the upload order of like when you
uploaded it and there's no way to backdate it to say this was actually two years ago yeah and
probably uh transistor just batch processes them and the order in which they complete is the order
much they upload yeah luckily when i did um when i did the when i transitioned to uh
transistor though they do have a you it just uses your old post dates so uh even though i transitioned
like i don't know a couple years ago or something like that um i still was able to you know like
some of the early episodes still show up as like being happening in 2016 even though they got
transferred later but anyway a lot of content good deal so no extras for you no I'm not very extra
just been working hard and stuff I'll share I'll have things to share eventually but right now
no extras I do have a joke I've brought for us what do you think oh yeah let's do it for it
yeah okay so Brian what if what if programmers were doctors
you know the old joke hey doctor my leg hurts well stop you know it my leg hurts when I like
lift it like this we'll stop lifting it like that right yeah there's a there's a fun variation on
that joke for programmers and it's it's basically the doctor equivalent of it works on my machine
it says doctor my leg hurts that's weird I also have a leg and it doesn't hurt the issue must be
on your side.
Yeah.
That's definitely true.
I like it.
It's dumb, but funny.
I know.
It's short and sweet.
I like it.
Cool.
Well, thanks for the joke, Michael.
And thanks, as always, for this wonderful episode.
You bet.
Bye, Brian.
Bye, everyone.
Bye.